1. When the wandering stars appear at times to go backward against the firmament,
2. Concerning the seeming retrogression of the planets, it must be said that
3. When Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn seem to reverse their course for a time,
4. The planets are sometimes seen to move contrary to their former progress, and this is because
5. As regards the backward motion that appears in the planets, the cause may be assigned thus,
6. The varying brightness of the wandering stars is to be understood from this, that
7. That one planet appears now brighter and now dimmer proceeds from
8. The diversity in brightness observed in Mars and the other planets arises because
9. The unequal splendor of the planets may be explained in this way, that
10. Since the wandering stars do not always appear with equal brightness, it follows that
11. Mercury and Venus are never found far removed from the Sun, because
12. That Venus and Mercury keep always near the Sun seems to show that
13. The motion of Venus and Mercury, which remain near the Sun, is to be explained by
14. One must account for the fact that Mercury and Venus do not wander through the whole heaven, and this is done by saying that
15. The close attendance of Venus and Mercury upon the Sun signifies that
16. The planets do not move with equal speed at all times, and the reason for this is
17. The inequality of planetary motion is made plain from observation, for
18. Since the wandering stars hasten and delay in unequal manner, it is necessary to say that
19. The irregular courses of the planets, though only apparent to some, are caused by
20. The appearances of the planets in station and retrogression are resolved if one grants that
21. The reason why the superior planets appear greatest at certain times is that
22. The planets seem nearer at one season and more remote at another, because
23. The annual path of the Sun through the signs gives rise to difficulties unless one says that
24. The fact that the seasons return in fixed order is connected with the solar course, for
25. The Sun is seen to pass through the zodiac in a yearly circuit, and the cause of this is
26. The relation of the solar year to the motions of the planets is best understood if
27. The appearances of conjunction, opposition, and greatest elongation are accounted for by this, that
28. The observed order of the planets with respect to the Sun may be explained from