For novice youths who are beginning to undertake the charge of astronomy for the commonwealth, after they have entered, eager to attempt it: by a short road, the vulgar track set aside: John of Sacrobosco’s little spherical work together with some additions scattered here and there marked with the letter A among the signs; likewise, against the ravings of the Cremonese in the planetary theories, John of Monte Regio’s disputation, so carefully and usefully composed:

And also George Purbach’s: on the very accurate motions of the planets, the Theoricae: a dedicated work, woven together in a useful order, begun under a favorable star. The treatise On the Sphere is divided into four chapters:

The first states the composition of the sphere: what a sphere is; what its center is; what the axis of the sphere is; what the pole of the world is; how many spheres there are; what the form of the world is. The second, of the circles from which the material sphere is composed and of that super-celestial work by which the intelligible one is imagined to be composed. In the third, of the rising and setting of signs, and of the diversity of days and nights, and what the division of climates is in the habitations of men. In the fourth, of the circles and motions of the planets:

and of the causes of eclipses, of the composition and convenience of the sphere. Chapter I. Since in the present life it is not possible to go up to the heavens, to behold the circles with one’s own eyes, to turn them about to whatever position one pleased while one lived, nor could anyone’s lifetime suffice to await the future positions. Now it is day elsewhere, elsewhere night: one sun or a certain star rises for one place, sets for another; in some places the same sphere stands upright, in others oblique and manifold. For these reasons it is good and convenient to take an artificial sphere, which can be turned by the hands at will, and:

(with the same position and arrangement) to fashion and perceive the other degrees and circles at least conveniently, so that, as by an example, we may be able easily to understand the natural sphere of the heavens. For memory therefore, with the zodiac corrected and its degrees—not nine or twelve—the sphere furnished with circles: first let it be of subtle metal or of wood, suitable in size and well smoothed and shaped, with two great circles placed orthogonally counted from pole to pole, and another circle passing through the poles and distant by sixty degrees. Likewise two tropics and two circles arctic and antarctic in their places. And a belt of the zodiac split by the ecliptic into twelve signs, the ecliptic degrees marked and with their names according to order, and each quarter of the equinoctial colure passing through ninety degrees separated. Let the fourth and the zodiac be split into quarters so that one colure crosses the two solstices and the poles of the zodiac, the other the two points of the equinoxes. With these eight circles well fixed and distinguished by their names, and with two round frames with holes bored in two diametrically opposite places where the two colures cut, let them be truly of the commonwealth:

of the sphere itself; an iron axis perfectly straight will be led through them crossing firmly: let that axis be set so that the sphere may be able to turn. Outside on the southern side let a wooden handle be placed around the fixed axis, so that the artificial sphere may be held more conveniently by hand. But first a little wooden sphere firmly set around the fixed axis in the middle of the sphere we shall set up, which may represent for us the mass of the earth, on the upper surface of which we will mark the relative regions of the sky, or twelve proper zones; seven climates and five habitable zones, together with all which we will set forth with their names: marking in that same circle the longitude and latitude more completely we wish. And the whole small sphere which is opposite the climate, with the two extreme zones of it, but that remaining one the southern which clings to the torrid zone, we will paint with green color so that we may understand the whole habitable land surrounded by the waters of the ocean sea.

Moreover, it is necessary to arrange three other movable circles around the outer sphere for greater convenience; but first the two: one elevated and touching, which may be turned around the axis of the sphere, held firmly in them. And this is the circle of the meridian having outside each half, especially that set at the pole, divided into seventy degrees with its fractions. The other indeed is that which is for the upright horizon, bearing signs. And to this circle a third inner circle must be cleverly joined through two little axes fixed in their holes around the points equally distant from the poles of revolution of the sphere, which precisely are of the direction of the equinoctial circle of the sphere: so that around those two little axes that third circle may be able to be led another time around the sphere from one pole of the sphere to the other. And we will make the ends of the small axes protrude so that they neither impede this nor the meridian. We will mark this circle for the oblique horizon: which just as in degrees we will divide. Thus the artificial sphere will be constructed as is commonly made in the schools with these material circles. And when we have turned the horizon upright or oblique in the sphere properly arranged, let us make that horizon be held firmly so that no part of its circle may be higher above the earth.

For thus it will truly be distant with height from our sight; and it will be good to say with necessity that the northern part of the sphere is placed toward the north, the southern toward the south; the eastern toward the east; the western toward the west. And it is fitting that the meridian circle be raised so that that part which indicates midday and likewise that which denotes midnight are equally distant from the horizon on both sides. Thus it will stand rightly; and we will have the place of the zenith at the top of the meridian, equally distant on both sides from the horizon; and its nadir at the lowest point of it. And thus if we set the elevation of the pole above the oblique horizon to the latitude of any place on earth, as for example to a city whose latitude will have been noted, first we will fasten the oblique horizon placed in its situation as at Rome, let that horizon be held firmly; then let us turn the sphere on its poles from east to west, nor contrary but toward the north its southern axis set at the horizon placed as statute: raising the northern pole above the horizon by the latitude of the city that is northern, or the southern pole if the latitude there is southern— the pole stands forth by the degrees of the meridian set distant from the horizon of the oblique; as many degrees or minutes as the latitude is. In this state the meridian will be held firmly; and thus we have the sphere oblique and the horizon suitable: the meridian at that city, with the breadth the horizon and meridian may cross the sphere, and revolve its poles within the said two circles (in fixed direction) to understand the motion of the first mobile of rising and setting and the rest: as in the sphere of the heavens after two days’ time of the day from the shadow the varieties and the rest which the motion of the first mobile is wont to touch we may wish to consider when we will have turned.

But if we wish to adapt this sphere equally to day and night motion, we can do so: therefore we will make the sphere of the heavens with its circles as has been said: another smaller outside beyond it so that it may be contained and be able to turn, as Purbach said, made from three whole circles: which he himself placed above, to satisfy sufficiently, in which two cut orthogonally and in two diametrically opposite points where they stand their poles pass through; beyond the sphere this slightly rises beyond equal thickness of a half finger: in whose middle is placed the earth which we wish the small sphere to represent; it needs not that axis; but the places of the poles of the world which before were at the extremities of the axis we will similarly set upon the outer sphere just made upon two equal little pins and round, around which the meridian circle and the upright horizon will be made and joined to the oblique horizon as before demonstrated and be able to be led around the circle. The third circle of the sphere itself likewise will be the broader circle for the zodiac constituted in twelve signs, the degrees marked as the other outer zodiac was named: but thus we will fix it, cutting the middle of the other two semicircular lines, total and not removed, to the two poles of the sphere itself.

And that sphere built with three circles will represent for us the ninth sphere with its zodiac and with its poles and with other surroundings, that in the tenth sphere the poles of the zodiac are arranged in such extremes of the axis which are set in the place of its poles circumscribed. Likewise will be another smaller outside constructed of the same kind placed as before described, which will represent the eighth sphere with its stars. Its two points diametrically opposite are the heads of Aries and Libra not of the circumference of the small circle: in the circle in which are truly the head of Aries and Libra of the circumference of the sphere revolve. But it is necessary first that the one contain the other: that the inner be of an ingenious make equal and hollowed thoroughly of the same, so that those points the heads of Aries of the sphere, a small pin with formed heads, protruding in the hollows themselves, may be able to be led around by hands lying on opposite parts of the ninth sphere placed: and with such measure neither by the same runs held too tight nor thus may it easily go out. For with the zodiac of one under the zodiac of the other we will be able to push equally the points of both spheres from one fourth to the other of its circle as they move; let this be understood in the last text of George Purbach. And when we will have placed the sphere itself interior upon the axis and the fourth proportional so that in its description will appear it is yielded the two: the zodiac and the signs make the northern and the southern which stand and which return to the first state and the rest. If we wish to build a sphere with fixed small stars so that we may be able to perceive the risings and settings, the mid-heaven and figures, we will place the material sphere solid in which on its surface we will mark certain circles more manifest: as the circle of the ecliptic, the circles parallel to the ecliptic two: each at six degrees as the zodiacal zone has, to distinguish the twelve signs.

Likewise we will mark the tropics and the arctic and antarctic circles, six circles colures passing through the points of the twelve signs and the poles of the zodiac; and the other circles of the stars of the ecliptic, the poles of the zodiac, and all the degrees of the zodiac; as the right ascensions of the equator, longitudes, latitudes of the fixed stars I will mark. And then we will have a true table verified according to which we will be able to place the stars upon the position of the sphere itself by this method: what is the longitude of a star when the colure cuts a parallel at the latitude of the star in the northern latitude or southern, we will mark that star with its letter to distinguish it and let it be understood in whatever mode itself. The horizon truly straight or oblique and the meridian of the body of the earth: we will fit to this solid sphere: that preceding which is with circles and is composed in the principles of geometry to be supposed. Therefore, from Euclid the sphere is thus described: the sphere is the turning of the circumference of a semicircle as many times as it returns to its place, led around. Indeed a sphere is such a round and solid thing which is described by a semicircle led around its chord. The sphere in three parts Theodosius thus describes: a sphere is a certain solid contained by one surface in whose middle is a point from which all lines drawn to the circumference are equal. And that point is called the center of the sphere; and a straight line passing through the center of the sphere applying its extremities to the circumference on either side is called the axis of the sphere. Two indeed points terminating the axis are called poles of the world.
And with certain geometric principles to be supposed which are added; and first such as indeed must be supposed and understood by those who know the geometrical discipline so that the things to be said may more easily be grasped, thus they are what we will subjoin and for the nearer novices’ sake we have added. A point is that which is indivisible, or which has no part that can be perceived by sight. A line is length without breadth, without depth: whose extremities are two points so that it is finite is understood. A line is the shortest extent from one extreme to another. And a straight line is that which is neither bent nor curved. A surface is length with breadth lacking depth: which is terminated by a line or lines. A plane surface is that which according to length and breadth is very slightly extended. A non-plane is that which has some concavity or convexity. A right angle of lines is a fixed straight application. A rectilinear angle is formed from two straight lines. An oblique angle is where one line is not straight: neither bent nor curved.

If on a plane surface a straight line occurs on a straight line it will produce on each side two equal angles, each of these is said to be perpendicular on the other and either of those angles is named a right angle. Likewise any angle equal to those two right angles will be a right angle; wherefore all angles of a straight line equal a right angle. But if a straight line meets a straight line and makes on each side two unequal angles, either of these is called oblique or declining upon the other: the greater angle is called obtuse and the smaller acute; therefore an angle of a straight line greater than a right angle is obtuse, smaller than a right angle is acute. A body is that which contains length, breadth, depth. A figure is that which is enclosed by a boundary or boundaries; without a boundary is no figure unless a surface or a body. Two straight lines do not enclose a surface: therefore they do not form a figure. Two plane straight surfaces likewise do not determine a body nor a figure. If there are two lines or two surfaces straight equidistant extended on either side and never meet, they are called parallels.

If therefore from three lines a surface is enclosed, let there be a three-sided figure which is also called a trigon and triangle. If from four, a quadrilateral; from five, a five-sided or pentagon; and the rest likewise in number of sides and angles are named; each figure has as many sides as it will have angles. A circle has no sides because if it collects all sides equally, all angles of it are mutually equal; which conversely is always especially to be understood in the long quadrilateral and the rectangle, here it contains all angles equal which are right angles; but the opposite sides are equal. That plane straight-lined figure is to be called which on every side is bounded by straight lines.

A sphere in bodily figures is the first which almost approaches the circle in surfaces. The second of the sphere itself is the bodily figure contained by one surface: in which point from which all lines drawn to that surface are everywhere equal: therefore that point is the center of the sphere. Thus it is evident that the sphere is round by that roundness established among geometers. A straight line which goes through the sphere and touches the surface on each side is not properly to be called the diameter of the sphere as many call it: because although it passes through the middle of the sphere itself, it does not divide it, but before it was called the axle or the greatest measure itself which itself is six of the first retaining the earth. Indeed the opposite points on the surface of the sphere terminating the axis are called poles; and the circle through which this revolves is called the great circle. The sphere has all great circles and they cross each other, because all are circles concentric. Moreover, all two great circles in the sphere divide each other equally. Any circle cutting the sphere whose spherical surface revolves around, those are called circles of the sphere. And each such circle has its own axis which runs through the center of the sphere in which the center of that circle always rests; the extreme points of that axis are poles of that circle. But if itself shall be a great circle the poles will be at equal distance from the circumference, but if it is lesser the axis has one part nearer to the circumference than the other. Moreover, the parallels are therefore called because both are equally distant from each other in the distance from the poles.

Part of the sphere is what we call a part of the arc of the flower. Which when it is half of the sphere, the middle part is called a hemisphere. But if it is more than a hemisphere the greater part of the sphere. And similarly the lesser part is called or as the part of the circle said is its own.

When two semicircles of greater circles of the sphere meet on some straight line passing through the center of the sphere they form an angle: the part of the sphere cut off by those two surfaces, the part of the surface of the sphere bounded by those is called a spherical lunule; whose axis one to the other is right-angled, and therefore poles are parallel; because both poles are equally distant. The part indeed of the surface of the sphere enclosed by two parallels is called a zone. A circle in a sphere drawn equal in its distance is called when it makes equal distances and makes equal angles or unequal in the surface of the sphere at the intersection point all four angles are equal which is caused by equal distances; because in the great circles one pair is collateral, the other pair from the other equal to those angles red is made. And conversely if they are circumferences or circles of the sphere cut orthogonally they require angles. And they are called those angles which are four right spherical angles which are all are pairs among themselves. But if only one angle among all comes equally or no one equal to another: those circles are said to cut oblique and to decline from each other.

Furthermore, all the circumferences of the circle whether great or small are understood to be divided into equal parts in which each are called degrees; the arc diameter of the circle is the circumference measured of the length of the circumference carefully drawn and placed the diameter is twenty degrees. Therefore sixty equal degrees are separated and each minute of equal arc; this is divided into seconds and thirds and fourths to infinity just as it is divided by an astronomer according to as there is a circle in the sphere whether greater or lesser into equal parts. Since every circle in the sphere besides the zodiac is understood like a narrow circumference: the whole zodiac is understood as having a surface in latitude of twelve degrees of which degrees we have spoken. Hence it is clear that some are mistaken in astrology saying the signs are square: unless by abusing the name they also call the square a quadrilateral. For a sign has thirty degrees in length, twelve in breadth. The line dividing the zodiac is called the ecliptic: thus from one side it leaves six degrees and from the other side likewise six degrees and this is called the axis of the ecliptic: because whenever and wherever they are in the heavens under it: an eclipse of the Sun or Moon happens. For there to be an eclipse of the Sun when it is new moon and the Moon is placed right between our sight and the body of the Sun: as in June: when the Sun is opposite the Moon between. Hence an eclipse of the Moon is nothing else but the interposition of the earth between the body of the Sun and the Moon. For all the other planets decline either toward the north or toward the south: yet all are under the ecliptic.

The part of the zodiac which declines from the equator toward the north is called northern or the north pole or arctic. And those six signs which are from the beginning of Aries up to the end of Virgo are called northern or arctic signs. The other part of the zodiac which declines from the equator toward the south is called southern or austral or antarctic. And six signs from the beginning of Libra up to the end of Pisces are called southern or austral signs. When therefore it is said that the Sun is in Aries or in another sign it must be understood not in the first point as we now receive a sign.

According to that signification, a sign is said to be a pyramidal quadrilateral whose base is that region which we call a sign: the vertex indeed is in the center of the earth. And thus properly speaking we can say the planets are in signs. A third manner sign is understood as six circles passing through the poles of the zodiac at the beginnings of the twelve signs; these six passing through the middle more north the rest toward the poles of the zodiac wherever each part of that is called a sign and has the name of that sign which is intercepted between its two lines. And around the poles they are said to be in signs. Likewise, a body is understood whose base is a sign: according to which we now lastly accept the degree of which is above the axis of the zodiac: and such a body in the fourth signification is called a sign. According to this acceptance the whole world is divided into twelve equal parts which are called signs: and thus whatever is in the world is in some sign.

Of the two colures. Two greater circles of the sphere are called colures, whose office is to distinguish the solstices and the equinoxes. And colure is said from Greek “kolouros,” which is tailless bull because those like the tail of the bull of the north are believed: which is it makes its winter course with a semicircle not a complete circle: thus the colure always appears to us as imperfect because only one of its halves appears to us, the other is hidden. The colure therefore distinguishing the solstices passes through the poles through the greatest declinations of the Sun: that is through the first degrees of Cancer and Capricorn. Hence the first point of Cancer where this colure cuts the zodiac is called the point of the summer solstice because when the Sun is there the solstice is then the Sun can no more approach the zenith of our head. The zenith therefore is the point in the firmament placed directly above our heads. The arc of this colure intercepted between the point of the summer solstice and the equator is called the greatest declination of the Sun.

[continued next chunk]
The second point, according to Almagest, is twenty-three degrees, thirty-three minutes. The first point of Capricorn where likewise the colure on the other side cuts the zodiac is called the point of the winter solstice because there the greatest declination of the Sun is equal to the former. The other colure passes through the first points of the equinoctial wherefore it is called the colure distinguishing the equinoxes. These two colures cut each other at the poles of the world at right spherical angles. The signs of the solstices and equinoxes are clear in these verses: “Six make two solstices: Cancer, Capricorn.” “But four nights are equal: Aries and Libra in days.”

There are likewise two other greater circles in the sphere, the meridian and the horizon. The meridian is a circle passing through the poles through the zenith of our head. It is called meridian because wherever placed at whatever time of year when the Sun with the motion of the firmament comes to its meridian it is midday there. By similar reason it is called the circle of midday. And note that cities which are more distant from the east than others have different meridians. The arc indeed intercepted between two meridians is called the longitude of cities. If two cities have the same meridian then they equally distant from east and west. The horizon indeed is the circle dividing the lower hemisphere from the upper. Hence it is called horizon, the boundary of sight. It is also called the circle of sight. It is twofold: right and oblique or declivous. The right horizon has a straight sphere they have whose zenith is in the equinoctial because that horizon passes through the poles of the world dividing the equinoctial at right spherical angles; hence it is called the horizon of a right sphere. The oblique horizon or declivous is that horizon whose pole is elevated above the horizon: which if the horizon cuts the equinoctial at unequal oblique angles; hence it is called oblique or declivous. The zenith of our head is indeed the pole of the horizon. From these it is clear that as much as the elevation of the pole of the world is above the horizon, so much is the distance of the zenith from the equinoctial which is clear thus.

Since in each natural day either colure twice joins with the meridian; the meridian whatever is proven of one is proven of the other. Let the fourth part of the colure distinguishing the solstices be taken which is from the equinoctial up to the pole of the world, let likewise the fourth part of that colure which is from the zenith of the place to the horizon because the zenith is the pole of the horizon. These two fourth parts of the same circle will be equal. But if from equal things equal things are taken or the same common thing is taken away, the residues are equal. The common arc taken away is the arc which is from the zenith to the pole of the world the residues will be equal namely the elevation of the pole of the world above the horizon and the distance of the zenith from the equinoctial.

Of the four lesser circles. Having spoken of the greater circles one must speak of the four lesser. Therefore note that when the Sun exists in the first point of Cancer or of the point of the summer solstice, by the carrying of the firmament it describes a certain circle which is last described by it from the side of the arctic pole. Hence it is called the circle of the summer solstice for the reason said above; or the tropic of summer from “tropos” which is conversion; because then the Sun turns back to the lower hemisphere and goes back from us. The Sun likewise existing in the first point of Capricorn or winter solstice, by the carrying of the firmament describes a certain circle which is last described by the Sun from the part of the antarctic pole. Hence it is called the circle of the winter solstice or the tropic of winter: because then the Sun turns toward us. Because the zodiac declines from the equinoctial thus the pole of the zodiac declines from the pole of the world. Therefore when the eighth sphere moves and the zodiac which is part of the eighth sphere moves around the axis, the pole of the zodiac moves around the pole of the world arctic: this circle which the pole of the zodiac describes around the arctic pole of the world is called the arctic circle: the circle which the other pole of the zodiac describes around the antarctic pole of the world is called the antarctic circle. Because the greatest declination of the Sun from the equinoctial is twenty-three degrees and thirty-three minutes, such is the distance of the pole of the world from the pole of the zodiac:

which is clear thus. Let the colure distinguishing the solstices be taken which passes through the poles of the world and through the poles of the zodiac. Since all quarters of the same circle cut each other equally, the quarter of this colure which is from the equinoctial up to the pole of the world will be equal to the quarter of the same colure which is from the first point of Cancer up to the pole of the zodiac.

Therefore from equal things taking away the common arc which is from the first point of Cancer up to the pole of the world the residues will be equal namely the greatest declination of the Sun and the distance of the pole of the world to the pole of the zodiac. Since moreover the arctic circle according to each part which is distant from the pole, it is clear that that part of the colure which is between the first point of Cancer and the arctic circle is almost double the greatest declination of the Sun or to the arc of the same colure which is intercepted between the arctic circle and the pole of the world, which also arc is equal to the greatest declination of the Sun.

Since this colure just like the other circles in the sphere is of three hundred sixty degrees, its quarter will be ninety degrees. Since the greatest declination of the Sun according to Ptolemy is twenty-three degrees and thirty-three minutes: add with this the arc to the arctic circle from the pole of the world and with those two together which make forty-eight degrees, subtract from ninety; the residue will be forty-two degrees; which is the arc of the colure which is between the first point of Cancer and the arctic circle: hence it appears that that arc is almost double the greatest declination of the Sun. Note that the equinoctial together with the four lesser circles are called parallels equally distant:

not because just as the first is distant from the second so the second from the third because this is false as appears when each according to its part is equally distant from one another paralleling the equinoctial: the parallel of the summer solstice arctic and the parallel antarctic. Note also that the four minor parallels namely the two tropics and the parallel uninhabitable by heaven are five zones or belts. Hence Virgil in the Georgics: “Five zones hold the sky, of which one ever glowing is burned by the sun.” They also distinguish just as many zones on earth by equal lines drawn through the zones placed below them.

Hence Ovid in the first of the Metamorphoses: “The middle one is not habitable by heat, two are hidden by high snow; the same temper he gave the two at the ends with snow and heat.” That zone which is between the two tropics is called uninhabitable because of the heat of the sun always running between the tropics. Likewise the zone of the earth placed directly under that is called uninhabitable because of the heat of the sun running over it. Those two zones which are circumscribed by the arctic circle and the antarctic circle around the poles of the world are uninhabitable because of too great cold because the Sun moves far from them.

Likewise is to be understood of the regions of the earth directly under them. Those other two zones one between the summer tropic and the arctic circle, the other between the winter tropic and the antarctic circle are habitable and of moderate heat compared to the torrid zone and of the cold of the extreme uninhabitable zones. The same to be understood of the earth’s regions directly under them. Of the characters of the sphere the ninth or of the fixed stars. Attend carefully and you will perceive what is the common opinion of the wise to understand above it has been evident: that not only the ecliptic is understood in the eighth sphere stellar; but the stars in the ninth and tenth are divided into twelve parts as many in twelve in latitude which are signs of the zodiac the ninth and tenth are named by these same names which they call signs of the zodiac according to the same order situated just as they are in the ninth or tenth not equally. But they say astronomers that in them are certain characters of figures known which appear to us from the number of which twelve constitute the signs which if they have in truth in this elemental machine many such configurations are hidden and everywhere are scattered the rest. The Persians and other nations found some of these to be perceptible by keenest sight at certain times in very clear nights in their regions and mountains standing and to whom it is granted or revealed those characters themselves attribute to angels of the sphere and of the stars by which characters and names of angels and constellations men experimenters the cultivators of these from ancient times inscribed into metals or into gems or into chosen stones they carved, or sealed in wax or clay or gum or painted images of various forms of various matters which they observed. Ptolemy also Greeks and old Hippocrates and Romans; of whose number was Virgil: nor is it needful to bring these: the authority suffices that they wrote in the known art. But we read also in the region of the damned are found certain characters and figures illicit: this is the beginning to the devil for the forming of the images to the delight, discord, murders to be produced and diseases likewise for greed and unlawful desire; thus that other evil ordinances which good angels revealed to the devil to men: as in magic art abominable things and incantations inscribed destroyed by many arts are found. Thus in necromancy should not be believed nor must they be brought forward which lead to perdition. Eternal fire of Gehenna; thus Christ prohibited; God orders not evil. And there are those who think that with cats, scorpions, mice, worms and similar worthless animals will produce eloquence, concord, victory, friendship, hunting or fishing, discovery of hidden treasures and similar things: not to be rejected or neglected but with words revealed to good angels I judge it safer to direct to good without evil; however various are the writings of the characters which are corrupt in script and to correct we find no rule; and they appear so prohibited nor believing angelic should we set down diabolic. We omit them; let us approach to the images of the stars especially with the sphere everywhere spread. Here they are twenty-two: in forty-eight images the whole heaven is distributed which the heathens named with different names. This order they arrange according to the Arabs among both poles. In them twenty-two fixed stars three hundred sixty make forms taken from the Sun to the north build figures. Of which they are first the great northern Bear (Ursa Major) little is called Cynosura. The third figure is called the dragon placed between them. The fourth is the flaming Cepheus. The fifth Cassiopeia. The sixth the Crown. The seventh Hercules who some call the Kneeler. The eighth the Sitting Swan called the falling vulture. The ninth, the Pleiades or hen. The tenth, Arctophylax or Boötes whom the Arabs call shepherd. The eleventh also Arcturus is called, the same also some call the Bear-driver; Perseus with the head of Medusa. The twelfth, the charioteer or driver. The thirteenth, the Serpent holder whom the Greeks call Ophiuchus. The fourteenth, the serpent itself. The fifteenth Sagittarius. The sixteenth the eagle whom others call vulture volant. The seventeenth, dolphin. The eighteenth, first horse. The nineteenth, second horse. The twentieth, Andromeda. The twenty-first, the delta triangle. Fixed stars, three hundred forty-six, on the path of the Sun twelve signs of the zodiac constitute. The Whale is the second girded with a sword Orion. The third Nile or the river Eridanus. The fourth the hare. Fifth the greater dog. Sixth the lesser dog or canicula. Seventh the ship Argo. Eighth the cup. Ninth the raven of Apollo. Tenth Chiron or Centaur. Eleventh Hydra the southern serpent. Twelfth the southern fish.

What signs are cut by which circles. The arctic circle cuts the head of the dragon, feet of Cepheus, feet of Ursa Major, and the left hand of Boötes. The summer circle cuts heads and knees of Perseus, leg and left shoulder of Andromeda near the whale and the hand, so that its head and feet and hand are between this and the arctic: likewise the feet of Pegasus and head of sign Ophiuchus, shoulders and head of the Virgin touching near, the Lion from breast to loins between this and the arctic, the remaining leg between this and the equinoctial. Likewise it cuts the whole Cancer through the middle. The equinoctial cuts all the feet of Aries, the knees of Gemini, the knees of Ophiuchus, the left wing of the eagle and the head of horse Pegasus with its neck. The winter tropic divides Capricorn through the middle, the feet of Aquarius, the feet of the hare, of the greater dog, the stern of the ship, the shoulders of the Centaur and the tip of the tail of Scorpio and the bow of Sagittarius. The antarctic cuts the bottom of the ship, the hind feet of the Centaur almost touching the front feet, the base of the stern and the end of the river. The Milky Way first passes through the left wing of the swan, through the left hand of Perseus, left shoulder of the driver and his hand, knees of the twins, feet of the lesser dog: there crossing the equinoctial it touches the top of the mast and then returning and the bow of Sagittarius half passes through and then returns to its beginning namely to the left wing of the swan. The equinoctial colure begun from the sign of Aries and extended toward the arctic pole touches the last of the delta and the highest head of Perseus; its right side comes to the pole then through the tail of the dragon to the left of Boötes to the right of the Virgin touching then left through the right hand of the Centaur which holds a sacrifice: through the body of the whale through the neck of the dog and returns to its beginning.

[continued next chunk]
The solstitial colure beginning at Cancer extends to the left beyond the front parts of Ursa Major, then to the nape, comes to the pole, then through the thighs of Little Bear, through the dragon to the left wing of the swan, the back and beak touching, then to Capricorn descending the colure goes below Argo whose rudder stands, returning to the first. In order that the above images may be known more easily we have described them in the plates according to the tradition of the ancients. Thus truly are the forms of the stars as the ancients left the astronomers. Aries is placed in the conjunction of the zodiac and of four: its back is toward the north, its head is turned toward the east: in whose figure four stars are noted. The first is great is placed on the right shoulder rises and the feet set. Taurus has its head against the west and is bent down as if to the earth’s surface. It rises backward and sets. Gemini have heads toward the north; both with their backs they stretch forth their limbs from that place hold each other mutually: they rise as the cetus rises downwards: they set by the feet. Cancer lies on its face, the lion toward its feet extends toward the pole on both sides and its belly toward the earth; it rises and sets on its posterior part. Leo looks toward the west and its back toward the north and rises and sets by the head. Virgo’s head lies after Leo and with the right hand touches the equinoctial circle which holds an ear: it rises and sets by the head. The Scales or Libra, which is the first part of Scorpio, is north of the other northern part. Scorpio looks back at Virgo, the feet stretch toward both poles and the tail is bent back toward the north and the belly looks toward the earth; it rises and sets with the bent body. Sagittarius has its head toward the north, looks at Scorpio, stretches the bow and arrow: the bow touches with the left hand and the left foot; this rises upright and sets headfirst. Capricorn has the back toward the north and its head toward Sagittarius and is bent toward Aquarius, it rises upright and sets headlong. Aquarius has his head toward the north; with his left hand he stretches over the back of Capricorn, and with his right he pours water from an urn which twists to the likeness of the fish and stretches to the rising. And since he is thus formed it is necessary to be seen with a crooked body: it rises first by the head with extended limbs. Pisces are two: the back of the first is of the second toward the arm of Andromeda: one looks back, the other to the north: and there is a bond that is a little band which seems to bind together the tails of both in the middle: the lower first is seen to rise and set.

Next follow the northern figures. The Little Bear which is according to our position wholly appears: it has the head toward the west and the belly toward the pole of the zodiac; and it has the arctic pole in the tail. The Great Bear in the opposite manner has its head toward the east and its back toward the pole of the zodiac. The Dragon makes two nodes of bendings around the pole of the zodiac dividing the two bears and directing its tail to the east and its head to the west. Hercules is placed between the two circles arctic and summer with both feet and knee; whence he is said to stand on his knee: with the left foot he presses the head of the dragon, with shoulders bare, on the right erect, he holds a club: sustaining the summer circle with the left with the lion’s hide stretching between the circle and the left knee, he extends his arms on both sides; he looks at the Serpent holder. He rises at the balance rising as far as the right foot: then the other parts Scorpio rising except the left hand which rises with Sagittarius. He sets first by the head as if hanging with his feet outside the arctic circle; and this at Leo rising. Arctophylax or Boötes is seen behind the back of Great Bear; his left hand is thus set that it neither rises nor sets, the feet he directs over Virgo; hence also on the right extending his arms under the right foot of Hercules he looks at the Great Bear; he holds the plow in the right hand as by the letter Y according to the custom of human life. The Serpent holder looks at Hercules and directs his feet over Scorpio; he holds with his hands the serpent or the snake incensed figure whose head is directed to the east toward the left part of the Serpent holder; but the tail has a bending and follows back when with the tail of the eagle rises and with Scorpio or up to the knees while the twins rise: when however Cancer rises it sets at the knees up to the knots that hold it descends up to the jaws: when Leo rises it sets wholly.

Therefore it is clear when one part rises the other sets, at least by equal parts. The Delphinus rises with Capricorn, sets with Virgo ascending. The Pleiades or hen with spread wings and feet rises with Capricorn and the first fish thus its belly faces the earth. The lyre of Orpheus is placed between the left leg and left hand of Hercules: of which the shell itself looks at the arctic circle, the vertex goes toward the summer circle. It rises with Sagittarius, sets with Virgo ascending. The double horse each has the belly to the north, above is the second horse which truly is called Pegasus the wing is painted superior body having even to the loins whence the posterior feet are of this horse: also the middle head is. It rises with Aquarius, sets before the fish which is placed on its back. Andromeda has the head in the winged horse which is placed under, bound thus lying directs her hands both. The right part rises with the fishes, the left with Aries rises; sets however first by the head, which is in the fish which lies under the arms being; rising namely Libra and Scorpio. Cepheus has the head on both sides the limbs: it places the feet on Taurus existing near the dragon: thus it has on its head the hat; is included in the circle so that beyond the shoulders and the head nothing sets. It rises its head with the bow of Sagittarius ascending; sets however Scorpio rising. Cassiopeia sits in a chair and is inclined to the right and its body looks toward the south; it has the head in the sign of Aries and the feet in the sign of Taurus; it rises with Sagittarius; sets with the first part of Scorpio rising. Perseus has his head toward the north and then extending the limbs directs his feet, its left foot is the head of Medusa which he holds with his left hand looking at the earth having the vertex toward the north; to his left thigh appear the Pleiades; the right foot presses the head of the Charioteer. He rises straight because his head as far as the belly of Aries rising ascends; he sets with the goat at Capricorn rising; his head by the sword at rising Sagittarius: his head and goat heads are set without completion. The Charioteer called also the goat-herd holds the right hand the reins figure near the twins this is in the Goat which has the head toward the north and that part here and there touches with the limbs as it touches with the foot the tropic of Capricorn so that it has the same star common: these are all northern stars of the said eighteen.

[continued next chunk]
Figures Southern. The Whale or Sea-monster in the southern part has its head in Taurus and tail in Pisces and the mouth holds the posterior part of Aries and has its belly south, is near the river Eridanus. Orion has his head partly here and there limbs elevated arms holds a club to the Centaur contending of the right he holds a dagger in his left hand girded with a sword and the shield he makes with the left the flowing sword like has the same star in the left foot of Orion the beginning of the river flows, the hare is placed in the sign of the twins. The river Eridanus begins at the left foot of Orion in the sign of Gemini and ends at the back of the greater dog and has the southern tail and belly toward the hare. The lesser dog or northern is placed again in the twins and in Taurus composed; it has the belly toward the south and the head at the beginning of Cancer. The ship Argo has its bottom toward the south the stern in the sign of Cancer and ends and is cut by Hydra in the sign of the greater dog the tail touches. Hydra having its head in Cancer ends tail in Libra and has a bend in the neck, the belly is southern; thus it bears the cup on its back on the first bend. Corvus also with two outspread wings resting on the back holds: whose head is toward the head of the water. The Centaur is described forwards in this with a shield; backwards a horse; holds in the right hand a spear which holds a dish, the head the belly toward the sign of Libra and looks at the wolf. The Wolf has the belly toward the Centaur the head south. The Ara or altar existing in the sign of Sagittarius has fire in the western part whose flame ascends above the flowing of that toward the south. And these are southern signs.

Thus are all stars in the old way; and the number of stars set in these images and in the tables ordered in this way of Alphonsus and by mark of the Almagest you will easily know. And because the star is the denser part of its sphere of round figure, and for that reason it shines as if condensed transparent: and the Milky Way is a brighter part among the parts of its sphere: also just as in the stars almost denser than the other parts. Likewise the parts of the Moon are not equally bright. We say that it does not appear twice in an eclipse through the light of any heavenly body only through bodies which are more luminous; especially such celestial, namely the Sun. And as is also said of the stars of fixed and of their number: the multitude and the company. The number cannot be grasped: if Aratus and Hyginus have attempted to number these stars many there are which every day they perceive. Astronomers before the time of Ptolemy and afterwards counted only about a thousand that by effect explain their properties and natures which Ptolemy himself counted and describes. In magnitude truly they are six differences or degrees: the brightest of the first order. And there are of the second order because less shining and smaller are of the third order, number two hundred eight; and of the fourth order number two hundred seventy-four; of the fifth order two hundred and of the sixth order number nine; besides these are fifteen nebulae appearing, and these nebulae are called the more obscure because they are dark: one is oblong such as the tail of the fish. The company indeed or constellation is an aggregation of two or more fixed stars joined together without order which compose images or form: for that reason forms or images are called not indeed corporeal marks. Nor must be thought that those who have attained the stars believed those corporeal figures still exist in heaven; or those figures flowers and such as they have described. But because they have known in various parts of the heaven various successes to be found above this element and imagined as similar figures to those they have painted in their imaginations: that the learned might be able to understand the firmament. In various modes and in many forms they have been imagined. But certain branches have been left to posterity we will record in their inscriptions. For the Chaldeans very ancient, the Greeks later were greatest investigators of astronomy whom the moderns likewise imitating little have added to the number of these stars especially which Aratus and Ptolemy preserved, and first they have agreed that forty-eight constellations or images exist according to the old; beyond which likewise are very many stars which still are not limited under form; which as we have taken from the books of Ptolemy we will briefly narrate as much as seems to be needed for this place. Whoever indeed desires to know particularly each star its name, situation, order: let him turn to his tables. Truly the names attributed by regions are diverse and the figures are fashioned by different nations; invented figures are different; but neither constellations nor places nor order of stars have changed. Some assign to certain stars a vulture, others an eagle, and to other stars likewise some allocate a javelin, some an arrow. They have called those images by the names of animals or not animated bodies: because they seem to have some likeness with the thing by which they are named: as the crown which consists of stars in a circle appears; or a hook itself or a scorpion upon scorpions; fishes upon fishes; the Virgin signifies virgins or maidens; the rest likewise not according to likeness of the thing. Two stars in uncertain part of the sky placed because certainly no line can in them two stars form a likeness of a dog: thus diverse names various images they have lined.

These and other observers have noted as we have said to have effects natural outcomes from heavenly differences. The rest: and the quadrants of the quadrants of forty-eight: in the whole sky passing places are placed which peoples of the deserts name with different names. The Arabs arrange these in order on both poles. Among these twenty-two fixed stars three hundred sixty taken from the sun north compose forms. Of which the Bear major to Cherit; the lesser is called Cynosura. The third figure is called the dragon placed between them. Fourth the flaming Cepheus. Fifth Cassiopeia. Sixth the Crown. Seventh Hercules which some call the Kneeler. Eighth the sitting Swan, called the falling vulture. Ninth the Pleiades or hen. Tenth Arctophylax or Boötes which the Arabs call the Shepherd. Eleventh also Arcturus is also called: and the Bear driver some name. Perseus with the head of Medusa. The twelfth charioteer or driver. The thirteenth holds the serpent whom the Greeks call Ophiuchus. The fourteenth is the serpent itself. Fifteenth the bow. Sixteenth the eagle which some call the flying vulture. Seventeenth dolphin. Eighteenth first horse. Nineteenth second horse. Twentieth Andromeda. Twenty-first triangle Delta. Fixed stars three hundred forty-six on the path of the sun twelve signs of the zodiac constitute. Whale is the second girded with a sword Orion. Third Nile or river Eridanus. Fourth the hare. Fifth the greater dog. Sixth the lesser dog or Canicula. Seventh Argo ship. Eighth cup. Ninth the raven of Apollo. Tenth Chiron or centaur. Eleventh Hydra the southern serpent. Twelfth the southern fish.

[continued next chunk]
Next, which signs are cut by which circles. The arctic circle cuts the head of the dragon, the foot of Cepheus, the feet of Ursa Major and the left hand of Boötes. The summer circle cuts the head and knees of Perseus, the leg and left shoulder of Andromeda near the whale and hand so that its head and feet and hand are between the summer and arctic; likewise the feet of Pegasus and head of Ophiuchus, the shoulders and head of Virgo touching near which indeed Virgo is placed between the summer and the equinoctial: Leo at the breast as far as the loins between the summer and arctic, the remaining leg between this and the equinoctial. Likewise it cuts all of Cancer through the middle. The equinoctial cuts all the feet of Aries, the knees of Gemini, the knees of Ophiuchus, the left wing of the eagle and the head of horse Pegasus with its neck. The winter tropic divides Capricorn by the middle, the feet of Aquarius and of the hare, the feet of the greater dog, the stern of the ship, the shoulders of Centaur and the point of the tail of Scorpio and the bow of Sagittarius. The antarctic touches the bottom of the ship, the hind feet of the Centaur almost touching the front feet, the base of the stern and the end of the river. The Milky Way first passes through the left wing of the swan, through the left hand of Perseus, the left shoulder of the driver and his hand, the knees of the twins, the feet of the lesser dog: there crossing the equinoctial it touches the top of the mast and then returning and the bow of Sagittarius at the middle it passes through the wings thence returning to its beginning namely to the left wing of the swan. The equinoctial colure begun from the sign of Aries and extended toward the arctic pole touches the last of the Delta triangle and the highest head of Perseus; its right side comes to the pole then through the tail of the dragon to the left of Boötes to the right of the Virgin touching then it leaves through the right hand of the Centaur which holds the victim: through the body of the Whale through the neck of the dog it returns to its beginning. The solstitial colure beginning at Cancer goes to the left beyond the front parts of Great Bear foot passes of that to the neck comes to the pole then through the nails of the Little Bear through the dragon to the left wing of the swan, the neck, whence led through the last of the Sagittarius and the beak of the northern eagle it touches: in Capricorn descending the colure goes under Argo whose rudder stands at the first returns. To make the cognitions of the aforesaid images easier we have described them in the plates according to the tradition of the ancients. These therefore are the forms of the stars as the ancients left almost to the astronomers. Aries is set in the conjunction of the zodiac of the quadrants is placed its back is toward the north its head is turned toward the east of which figure four stars are counted. The first is great is placed on the right shoulder it rises and by the feet it sets. Taurus has its head against the west and is bent down as if to the earth; it rises backward and sets. Gemini have heads toward the north; they stretch out their limbs on both sides hence the bodies apart they hold each other mutually; they rise at the laying down of the cetus they set by the feet. Cancer lies face downward Leo puts its feet toward the pole and its belly looks toward the earth; it rises and sets on its posterior part. Leo looks back on Cancer and has the back toward the north and rises and sets by the head. Virgo has the head after Leo and with the right hand touches the equinoctial circle and the ear holds; it rises and sets by the head. The scales or Libra which is the first part of Scorpio is north and the other not northern. Scorpio looks back at Virgo, the feet stretch toward the poles, the tail is bent back toward the north and the belly looks toward the earth; it rises and sets with the curved body. Sagittarius has the head toward the north, looks at Scorpio stretches bow and arrow, the bow touches with the left hand and the left foot; this rises straight and sets headlong. Capricorn has the back toward the north and its head toward Sagittarius and is turned toward Aquarius upright it rises and headlong sets. Aquarius has his head toward the north; the left hand stretches beyond the back of Capricorn, thus the right pours the water of the urn which is rolled to the image of the fish and stretches to the east; so formed it is necessary to be seen with a turned body; it rises first with the head, the limbs extended. Pisces are two; the back of the first and of the second is toward the arm of Andromeda: one looks back, the other toward the north: and there is a band i.e. a little line by which seemingly a certain bond binds between both of them the tails in the middle: the lower first is seen to rise and set.

The following figures northern. The Little Bear according to our position wholly appears. It has the head to the west and the belly toward the pole of the zodiac: and it has the pole arctic in the tail. The Great Bear in the opposite manner has the head toward the east and back toward the pole of the zodiac. The Dragon makes two nodes of bendings around the pole of the zodiac dividing both bears turning the tail toward the east and the head toward the west. Hercules is placed between two circles arctic and summer with both feet and the knees; hence he is said to stand at his knee: with his left foot he presses the head of the dragon with shoulders bare right he holds the club: sustaining the summer circle with the left with the lion skin in the middle interval between the summer circle and his left knee extending arms on both sides he looks at the Serpent holder. He rises with Libra as far as his right foot; then the remaining limbs rise with Scorpio, except the left hand which rises with Sagittarius. But he sets first with the head as if hanging with the feet outside the arctic circle and this at Leo rising. Arctophylax or Boötes is seen behind the back of Great Bear; his left hand is such that it neither rises nor sets, he directs the feet over Virgo; hence also stretching out his right arm under the right foot of Hercules he looks at the Bear; he holds a plow in the right hand as by the letter Y according to the custom of human life. The Serpent holder looks at the face of Hercules and directs the feet over Scorpio; he holds with his hands the snake or the snake-encircled figure whose head is directed to the east toward the left part of the Serpent holder; but the tail has a bending following backward. When it arises with the tail of the eagle from the east with Scorpio until the knees while the twins rise: when Cancer rises it sets by the knees as far as the knots that he holds descends as far as the jaws: when Leo rises he sets completely. Perseus rises with Gemini and by the hare; sets however with the feet when Virgo rises, Andromeda rises with Pisces and sets headfirst. Triangle rises with Cancer sets when Sagittarius rises.

Of the winds. And because some have wanted the winds to be in quadrants, they are placed with their names in the circle of the horizon with their abbreviations.

Of the orthographic figure: The orthographic figure is the true demonstration of the right position of the heavens. Therefore as much of the heavens is above the plane of the horizon that much in the same figure is distributed by the colures, that part of the heavens above the horizon is known with the poles marked. But because the circle of the equator is greatest and of perfect roundness with the same center with the horizon which is divided into degrees so the part of the sky will be known. For if the east and west points of the horizon are united with the center of the equator (west) and from the center the half of the equator to the east is drawn from the poles to the same center perpendicular, the colures are clear as they cross the equator at right angles and divide the hemisphere into two equal parts.

[continued next chunk]
Indeed a star in the position of latitude is shown by the projection of its meridian, the colures, and the degrees which are rightly noted the positions of the stars will be clear to those who use this figure. Thus if you wish to know what stars with a straight sphere rise under Capricorn which not so: see in the figure above the horizon plane from the equator to the east is drawn in the space of thirty degrees as noted at the eastern point under this; the colure at right angles to the equator in the perpendicular of the colure under the same and so other signs are shown likewise. And thus what stars we wish to know in that will be brought forth by the horizon; thus generally it is understood of the oblique sphere but particularly with a specific sphere it is not possible in this because the distance of the poles is not shown. Therefore with a true sphere arranged as before said the orthographic figure is understood in the positions of the stars above.

The stereographic figure is clearer because that hemisphere which is above the horizon shows its position and the part is in the point of the pole. The equator is extended in a circle line which the horizon upright crosses the equator at right angles; the colures likewise when the poles of the world and of the zodiac are placed in the same circle are cut at right angles and are a diameter of the equator. Therefore if we wish to know the position of the sphere we turn it with its poles and find from the roundness the sign of the longitude of the orbits of the equator divided into degrees not noted in which part the horizon must be placed we show the colures. We place the pole of the world at the center and bring the pole of the zodiac. And will be inclined at the equator as is in the stereographic figure with a perpendicular placed upon the horizon. And immediately the two poles with longitude of the planet by the degrees noted it will appear to those who use.

Of the astronomy which is confirmed by astronomy. This science in part was devised by men using imagination through long experience of its tests, going forth from sense to intelligence without perhaps full rational certainty, yet not reprehensible to those using its rules because it conducts much from sense to intelligence. Astronomers however are supplied by the physics of their precepts with demonstrations that either the physical demonstrations be true and the astronomical precepts or the true astronomical precepts and the physical demonstrations false. Therefore by what sense of eye, experience placed will have shown the colors listed from principles and their following definitions. And it is called from the stars of the heavens, this part is philosophy which seeks the figure and motions of the stars: whether it is continued or not, as is written in the first chapter through the sphere and this is called general astronomy. And it has three forms: the first pure mathematics considered by the wise many with natural mathematics: the second natural: the third mixed which together with the intellect with sense is not pure nor wholly imaginary: but as the Judge all these things of the heavens are considered: that it is also called judicial which is confirmed by astronomy which has four forms because if of judgments from the knowledge of the higher bodies how they are insofar as regards the dividing back: and the other regards the effect of the higher upon the lower: and the third imports when the future effects are known: the fourth when the causes of effects unknown are inquired; this is common to all the mathematical and the natural which is from Astronomy.

The motion of the heavens. The movement of the heaven is tripled: one from the east to west in a uniform and ordinary way called daily: which is simple and not mixed with the movement of the parts: of simple: its poles are the poles of the world: its own is preserved in the daily motion to be hidden the space of the rising to the setting: as motion is understood not naturally. Also it can be three because alone five days are not constant nor covering the spaces of which either the forces or to be covered from the cause. Therefore the morning star rises before the Sun when eight degrees or more have from the Sun to the east in longitude: then rising after the Sun sets it is the morning after the rising of the Sun. After the setting of the Sun when fourteen or more degrees of longitude distant appear, when it begins to move and as to the Sun.

A second motion of the heaven is that of the ninth sphere contrary to the first from west to east in the succession of the signs, uniform, so that in a hundred years almost one degree is traversed. A third is of trepidation, back and forth, of the same sphere (as Alphonsus teaches), small but necessary. Likewise the proper motions of the planets are known: a planet is called morning when it rises before the Sun having eight degrees or more of longitude to the east of the Sun; then rising after the Sun it sets: it is morning after sunrise. When after sunset it is distant fourteen or more degrees of longitude it appears then it begins to set and likewise as to the Sun.

The rising and setting of signs according to poets and astronomers: The rising and setting of the signs according to poets is threefold, namely cosmic, achronic, and heliacal. Cosmic rising is when a sign or star above the horizon on the east side with the Sun rises. And although in every artificial day six signs thus rise, par excellence that sign is said to rise cosmically in which likewise the Sun rises. And this rising is proper and daily. About this rising we have in the Georgics where he says when the Sun is in Taurus thus: “Bright with golden horns the Bull opens the year,” and on the contrary which with the Dog star sets he says in the same: “Before you, Scorpius, rises beneath the great Dog.” Cosmic setting is with respect to the Sun: when the Sun rises with some sign, the opposite sign sets cosmically; this setting is said in the Georgics where it is taught about the sowing of grain at the end of autumn when the Sun rises in Scorpio the sign opposite to it, where the Pleiades set: thus, “Before you the Pleiades shall sink beneath the wave.”

Achronic or temporal rising is when a sign or star after sunset emerges above the horizon on the east side; it is called temporal because it is born at a mathematical time with the Sun’s setting. About this rising we have in Ovid in the exile: “Four autumns brought the rising Pleiad,” four and forty years have passed since he was in exile. But Virgil wants in autumn that the Pleiades set; hence contrary seems. The reason is that according to Virgil they set cosmically, according to Ovid they rise temporally: which can happen on the same day at different times because the cosmic setting is in respect of the Sun’s morning; the temporal rising is in respect of the evening opposition. Achronic setting is with respect to the opposition; hence Lucan says: “You, the Scythian star, urged little drops” etc.

Heliacal rising is when a sign or star begins to be seen by the elongation of the Sun from it which before could not be seen because of the nearness of the Sun. Example is set by Ovid in the book of the festivals thus: “Now the bright constellation of the Gnosian Crown rises.” Which existed in Scorpio could not be seen because of the proximity of the Sun, of which example is above cited: “When the Bull going opposite meets the Dog star.” Heliacal setting is that in which to that sign the Sun approaches: it cannot be seen because of its own excessive brightness. Example is in the verse proposed: “The Dog star setting in Scorpius.”

Of the rising of signs according to astrologers: In a right sphere the equinoctial circle and the horizon in succession rise equally, for there the motion of the heaven is uniform; but an angle which makes the equinoctial with the oblique horizon differs in different places. Parts of the zodiac necessarily have unequal risings in any sphere: if any of the arcs of the zodiac rise at any place of earth the less the equinoctial rises, the more time each sign occupies in its rising. The sign rises truly when the part of the equinoctial rises which rises together with that sign is above the horizon or ascends, or that part of the equinoctial sets which sets together with the setting sign. A sign is said to rise straight when the greater part of the equinoctial rises with it; obliquely when the lesser.

These things are to be understood of setting. And it must be known that in a right sphere the four quarters of the zodiac, the four cardinal circles and the two equinoctial points, to which the ascensions are given, the signs are equal in their rising. These are: Pisces, Aries, Taurus, Gemini in six signs: and so there is a fourth of the equinoctial just as fourth in rising; yet the parts in that fourth are not equal. Likewise understand of the quarter of the zodiac which is from Libra to Sagittarius as far as Sagittarius. Also understand of the quarter of the zodiac which is from Capricorn to Pisces as far as the end of Pisces.

In an oblique or declined sphere the equator of the zodiac is brought back. The middle parts of the zodiac approach the angle of ascension. The middle I call those from the beginning of Aries as far as the end of Virgo or until the other half of the equator reaches the ends of the other middle part of the equator. As much as the greater part of the equator rises with it, the same part rises: and they rise together. And conversely happens in the other middle that is from the beginning of Libra up to the end of Pisces: then the greater part of the equator sets with those middle parts they set together. Hence it is clear that the aforesaid argumentation may be clear why equal arcs of the zodiac are not equal in their risings. It is a rule that in an oblique sphere any two arcs of the zodiac equal and equally distant from any of the four equinoctial points have equal ascensions. Hence follows that opposite signs have equal ascensions; this Lucan says of the fall of Cato in Libya concerning the equinoctial east: “Not does the oblique way, nor more straight the Taurus exits, nor the Scorpius gives equal times, nor does the Virgin order slow to descend, nor do the Fishes.” From which it is clear that opposite signs have equal ascensions and equal settings, their opposition being equal. It is not valid to argue that if two arcs begin at the same time always the greater rises from one and the less from the other so the greater arc is finished sooner: therefore that arc rises sooner, the greater part always is that which rises sooner. This argument’s fallacy is clear in the quarters said: if we take a quarter of the zodiac from the beginning of Aries to the end of Gemini the greater part of that rises from the quarter of the equinoctial than the fourth of the equinoctial which is terminus in rising of that quarter: yet those two quarters rise together. The same understand of the quarter of the zodiac from the beginning of Libra to the end of Sagittarius. Likewise of the quarter from the beginning of Cancer to the end of Virgo. In the oblique sphere the middle of the zodiac is far from its ascensions. The middle I say those that are from the beginning of Aries to the end of Virgo with the middle of the equatorial part with itself terminus arise with the quarter of the equinoctial: the greater part of the zodiac arises with the equator there rises with those middle parts; and they rise together. And conversely happens in the remaining middle that is from the beginning of Libra to the end of Pisces, the greater part of the equator always rises with the zodiac and that middle they rise together.

Hence is evident the argumentation above of ascensions of the arcs of zodiac in the right sphere and in the oblique: just as some diminish ascensions and others increase them: and thus are days natural unequal.

A natural day is the turning of the equinoctial around the earth once cut by any part of the zodiac so long as the Sun passes with its proper motion contrary to the firmament. But the ascensions of those arcs are unequal: so the next day will not be equal to the previous because with the Sun there will be delay almost one degree. Note also that the Sun returning from the first point of Capricorn through Aries to the first point of Cancer when drawn by the firmament it describes not circles but spirals: yet in this our vision no error is sensible and in this vision the turns are called circles. And they are the number of which some of the circles are called circles of natural day. The arcs above the horizon are arcs of the day; those below are arcs of the night. In a right sphere the horizon of the right sphere crosses the poles and divides all these circles into equal parts. Hence equal arcs of day are equal arcs of night; hence it is clear that under the equinoctial whoever they are under whatever part of the firmament the Sun is day and night equal. But in an oblique sphere the oblique horizon divides the equinoctial into two equal parts. Hence when the Sun is in either of the equinoctial points then the arcs of day are equal to the arcs of night as the equinoctial in all the earth. All other circles are divided by the oblique horizon into unequal parts so that in all the circles which are from the equinoctial up to the tropic of Cancer then in the tropic of Cancer the arc of day is greater than the night arc, which will be the more the nearer the Sun is to the Sun and the less the more it recedes. And conversely it is in the other circles which the Sun describes from the equinoctial to the tropic of Capricorn and in that: there the arc of day is less the arc of night. And according to the increase of ascensions of the zodiac know that days natural are unequal. In the right sphere only the obliquity of the zodiac in the oblique sphere the obliquity of the horizon. The third is ascribed to the eccentricity of the circle. And note that the Sun has two motions: one which it performs daily with the firmament carried by the firmament the Sun describes it in degrees day and night; and axis of the Sun itself to the imagination the Sun describes daily one degree and the same day if not for the obliquity of the zodiac in each month the inequalities of the ascensions are considered the natural day is not equal. In the right sphere one and thus exists the day of the oblique sphere because of the oblique horizon.

Therefore note that six signs are from the beginning of Cancer to Libra up to the end of Sagittarius have ascensions in the oblique sphere together greater than the ascensions of the six signs which are from the beginning of Capricorn to Gemini. Hence those six signs rise first straight rise those six oblique. Virgil: straight go, oblique fall, etc. Likewise when the greatest day is in summer the Sun existing in the beginning of Cancer then straight rise the six signs in day: in the night the six oblique. Conversely when is least day in year the Sun existing in the beginning of Capricorn then in day rise six oblique; in the night six straight. When the Sun is in either equinoctial point then in day rise three straight signs and three oblique, and in the night likewise. And it is a rule that whatever is the length or brevity of day or night six signs rise in the day, six in the night; not by the length or brevity of the day or night more or fewer signs rise. From this it is gathered that an hour of natural day is the twelfth part of that day: likewise of night. Therefore hours of unequal length vary. In every other circles that are to one side the equinoctial or toward the southern or toward the northern: days are increased or diminished according to more or fewer straight signs rising. Hence we see where the pole of the world is more elevated above the horizon the more are the days of summer straight signs rising; but conversely in winter being in the southern signs days there are fewer.

Of the shape of the world and of the right horizon. And to understand this, suppose the horizon is right under the equinoctial: when a conjunction happens under that horizon at the end of Sagittarius at the end of Gemini: there the ascensions that those degrees have are equal to those degrees. Hence in the rising set the straight in the horizon the sign is straight. Hence it is plain that no straight ascends without oblique there. As to the differences of days and nights and of climates.

The division of climates: A climate is the space of the earth in which sensibly the length of the day varies little. And where one day is sensibly shorter in a region nearer the south. The space therefore as much as the day begins in the same hour to vary sensibly is called a climate. Nor is the same horologium from the beginning of the day without this space to be observed. The hours of the cold zone are sensibly varied. Therefore the reason is where the hour of the day sensibly varies for the horologium. The middle of the first climate is where the greatest day is fourteen hours. The elevation of the pole above the horizon by its latitude as far as the place where the length of day is fourteen hours and a half the elevation of the pole above the horizon is thirty degrees from the equator up to the place where the length of day is fourteen hours: one quarter of an hour above the horizon. The length of the second climate is from the extreme of the first climate up to the place where the length of the longest day is fourteen hours and three quarters and the elevation of the pole is thirty-six degrees and the distance of the earth is four hundred sixty miles. The middle of the third climate is where the greatest length of the day is fifteen hours and the elevation of the pole forty-one degrees and a half. It is called Diarses. The latitude of it is from the extreme of the second climate up to the place where the length of the longest day is fifteen hours and a quarter and the elevation of the pole forty-three degrees and the elevation from the earth four hundred miles. The middle of the fourth climate is where the length of the greatest day is fifteen hours and a half and the elevation of the pole forty-seven degrees and a half: and it is called Rhoda. The latitude of it is from the extreme of the third climate up to the place where the length of the day is fifteen hours and three quarters and the elevation of the pole forty-nine degrees and thirty minutes; and the space of the earth is four hundred miles. The middle of the fifth climate is where the length of the greatest day is sixteen hours and the elevation of the pole is fifty-one degrees and a half to the third; and it is called Diachoras. The latitude of it is from the extreme of the fourth climate up to the place where the length of the greatest day is sixteen hours and a quarter, the elevation of the pole fifty-three degrees and a quarter; which distance of the earth is two hundred miles.

The middle of the sixth climate is where the length of the greatest day is sixteen hours and a half; and the elevation of the pole is fifty-five degrees. And it is called Diareph. The latitude of it is from the extreme of the fifth climate up to the place where the length of the greatest day is sixteen hours and three quarters; the elevation of the pole fifty-seven degrees and one third; the distance of the earth is two hundred forty miles. The middle of the seventh climate is where the length of the greatest day is seventeen hours and the elevation of the pole is sixty degrees; and it is called Diapotamia. The latitude of it is from the extreme of the sixth climate up to the place where the length of the greatest day is seventeen hours and a quarter; the elevation of the pole sixty-three degrees and the distance of the earth two hundred forty-five miles. The middle of the eighth climate is where the length of the greatest day is seventeen hours and a half; the elevation of the pole is sixty-eight degrees thirty minutes. It is called Diapleoros. The latitude of it is from the extreme of the seventh climate up to the place where the length of the greatest day is seventeen hours and three quarters; and the elevation of the pole is seventy-one degrees; the distance of the earth is two hundred eighty-five miles. Beyond the end of this eighth climate although there may be several more habitable places however to avoid the inconvenience of uninhabitability it is not computed.

Therefore the total difference in these climates is three hours of days because the elevation of the pole above the horizon differs by thirty-eight degrees. Thus it is evident of each climate the latitude from its beginning toward the equinoctial up to the end of the same toward the pole and the pole is greater than that of the other; that is clear. The length of a climate can also be called a line drawn from east to west equally distant from the equator. Hence the length of the first climate is greater than the length of the second and so on which happens by the narrowing of the sphere.

Of the circles and of the motions of the sphere and of the causes of eclipses of the Sun and Moon. Chapter IV. Note that the Sun has a circle equally moves on the surface of the ecliptic and eccentric. The eccentric is one circle if one understands circle: but the Sun’s which divides the earth into two equal parts does not have the center the same as the center of the earth but another. It is the point in the eccentric which approaches the firmament most is called the apogee: the whole. The point opposite is called the perigee. The Sun from west to east has two motions: one in its own circle during each day about nine and fifty minutes nearly. Another over the entire circle of the signs of equal circle with the motion of fixed sphere about one degree in one hundred years. From these two motions the Sun’s path is computed from west to east equally it cuts the circle of the signs in three hundred sixty-five days and a quarter almost, besides a little which is of no sense.

Each planet besides the Sun has three circles besides the Sun’s: the equant the deferent and the epicycle. The equant is a circle equal to the circle of the Sun or of the ecliptic. The deferent likewise is a circle eccentric not on the surface of the ecliptic: in one half it declines toward the north in the other toward the south and cuts the equant in two places. And the points of intersection are called the nodes; which latitude in the middle is narrower toward the end. Between those intersections the part by which the Moon goes from the south to the north is called the head of the dragon. The remaining part from which it goes from the north to the south is called the tail of the dragon. The deferent and the equant of any planet are equal. And note that the deferent and equant of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury are eccentric and outside the ecliptic, in the same surface. Each planet also besides the Sun has an epicycle. It is a little circle on whose circumference the body of the planet is carried: the center of the epicycle is always carried in the circumference of the deferent. The center of the epicycle is always on the circumference of the deferent and the distance from the earth is understood.

[continued next chunk]
Thus if a line is drawn from the center of the earth to a node of the deferent, the other to the center of the epicycle of any planet placed at some point: one part is at the east another at the west; the point of contact on the west side is called the first station; the point of contact on the east side is called the second station. And when the planet is in either of those stations it is stationary. The arc of the epicycle between the two stations when the planet is there it is direct. The arc indeed of the lower epicycle between the two stations the planet there existing is retrograde. The Moon’s month has neither first station direct nor retrograde.

Hence note that when the Moon is in the head or tail of the dragon under the nadir of the Sun then the earth is interposed; the cone of the earth’s shadow falls upon the body of the Moon: hence since the Moon has no light except from the Sun: in truth it fails of light. And there is a lunar eclipse natural in all the earth when it is in the head or tail of the dragon near this. The eclipse of the Moon within determined bounds of the eclipse near this or around happens. Hence in every opposition that is in full moon it is not always that the Moon is in the head or tail of the dragon with the nadir of the Sun nor does it fail to suffer at any full moon: as is clear in the figure which follows. If the Moon is in the head or tail of the dragon or near that then the body of the Moon is interposed between our sight and the Sun’s body. Hence it will shadow the Sun with its body: thus the Sun suffers an eclipse: not because it fails in light but because it fails to us because of the interposition of the Moon between our sight and the Sun. In a conjunction that is in a new Moon. Note also that when an eclipse of the Moon happens it is an eclipse in the whole earth: but the eclipse of the Sun is not the same for all climates because it happens in diverse aspects in diverse climates; as is clear because it is diverse the aspect of different climates. Virgil says elegantly the nature of both eclipses briefly: “Of the failing Moon you will predict by the former.”

From these it is clear that that eclipse of the Sun happened in the passion of the Lord and that the same passion was at full moon: that eclipse of the Sun was not natural but miraculous contrary to nature because an eclipse of the Sun ought to happen at new Moon or around it. Therefore Dionysius the Areopagite in the same passion said: “Either the God of nature suffers or the machine of the world is dissolved.” Here ends the little spherical work of John of Sacrobosco.

Appendix: John of Monte Regio against the delirious theories of the Cremonese preface. To all students of good arts John of Monte Regio greeting. Although we have sent out already an index of works which we give to our librarians: we have given it to some who have received it: yet rather to those inflamed by zeal of study we have immediately handed the item worthy of comprehension: which some by change of names or absolutely reject, new in the translations brought in: and because many contradict the very ancient authors; we do not fear obstacles nor names on account of those so bold or shrill: as I wish to be able to deal with true copies or correct new codes to be transcribed from scribes: it must not be concealed that it is permitted to consult the compass from which someone may detract from authority; but because mathematical studies now for many years are defiled and almost abandoned by all, with every stain as far as is possible to be wiped away I shall make clear that in the same it is necessary to change many things and again in translating to recite lest they are needed. To contradict authors when ancient if truly they err is of the liberal ingenuity not of the insolence that is allowed: warned by the example of those who bring forth some new thing. Which finally we have not spared the books because some attribute to their own books inscriptions of names through old credulity; and although they take arguments from authority they think that the argument is strong; but as a few suspect that in the minds of others something singular is the pride of the death of men to compose something unwilling that those still alive perhaps we would neglect: they now with life removed by the religious would not dare to oppose the opinions of those lest they seem envy or insolence do not dare so if they rejoice; whether they will think that with great labor is not able to be done: Here therefore it is seen I believe that many of these studies of dreams of some or another have contracted the charmed cares overly secure and compatibilist consolations: truly however the contagion is common to all liberal studies to the age: in mathematics even more shameful because the effect of all: perpetual rotation of the starry; in the studio of the age the studies of the stars have grown cold: therefore the skies are: more necessary to conduct all be idle leisure consequently; mathematical knowledge run away now unknown long remain undone whose unexampled to lead is long: except Gerard of Cremona and John of the Holy Cross with all the remaining nothing: almost all neglect. Already the commentaries on the Theorica of planets: the Spheres: how much of material we have seen. But where the number that whatsoever volumes we have taken touched some at least credible. Here some others consulted at the beginning of exhortations are immediately the public and vulgar crowd pour delirious things and we are ridiculed. It shames seriously to think how much from this dishonor against many who wish the transcribed and printed under the names of foreign authors: until they are false the examples of noble authors corrupted by ignorance: the after-time vitiated by copies false of what is. Who does not wonder at the beautiful forms of art stirred up from the stains of such men published of books which how great is found not corrected.

We could not restrain lest we bring forward one example of some bold corrector: which the Latin geography of Strabo in Rome recently made and exhibited by the scribes who was: which we laugh at more is fitting to show from whom one uses that I know and settle some: He in the twelfth book where the length of the greatest day is treated says that happens to those living between Rome and Naples: says the greatest day is fifteen hours; of solstitial day indeed the tenth. The by ignorance and barbarism he indicates with one word double: he placed the ignorance. When the Latin says equinoctial hours: the foolish one thought not that because how equinoctial hours of the solstice day they could constitute the evening solstice much distance between. Thus the solstice hours he noted ignorant as equinoctial hours. Not to pass by those who blame the new translators would think likewise those to whom earlier works unknown they would attempt and correct not improper only not too young and not strongly know how to use to commit beasts to ruminants and indulge in piggishness I think or others that the experiment to me object a crime of insolence: as if Germanic and northern barbarism flows: destitute of books and absent from frequent learned men: I would dare seek all the celebrated cities if perhaps I may obtain. But unless they measure the small parts of the whole universe they suspect censuring my editions will judge if anyone of God who requires will consider the multitude of my labors what may be judged: to correct would admit a just fault unless the public shame of ignorance is discovered in the correction itself. If he allows lest I prolong the treatise these things now enough.

Thus the little treatise unless by hatred for so foolish a man censure one better remains for later caution: certainly punishable I think he will pay the penalty those more lenient error they commit by equal ones if the courage would threaten the authority of some noble ones perhaps; wherefore caution is to be he feared lest in books of noble authors alien matters be substituted to the shame with later allowed: thus to the torch of printers set false examples behold the editions: Hence not to be quiet in our imaginations it happens in sweet whiteness having opinions valued our compositions false: thus attempts false example whose examination they not to the thing but as the scribes of reason against seekers against the city’s good amours indeed. Because of which more than as already they detract from authority: they therefore let some go I avoid their prejudice who in their age will see more the wrong of the commonwealth of scholars.

Be it therefore that they alone attain: why do they with too similar hate of their own place do they take against me? that under previous names apply themselves nevertheless in poetry; why then should I be ashamed to warn plainly? may there be hope said I perhaps the envy of some otherwise intolerable to ask from the greatest to point of that of those who use. The matter is rejected the whole world of lightning respect: when in making a republic of laws: if the others of Christian religion of names: of God in a similar part of learned men from the cause of God they claim with friends lest by the lascivious random the whole of the ancient languages brave shall be worn by the seam.

Now as to the true place of the conjunction or opposition of the luminaries and of the casting of the astrolabe taking in both nights with the pole indicated two elevations equal placed the meridian be measured: then proceed with the co-measurer straight against the north to the midday until on another night the pole will stand higher by one degree. After having measured the space of this journey we find seven hundred miles and thus giving to each degree of the three hundred sixty of the zodiac so many miles the circumference of the earth is found. From these by the rule of circle and diameter the diameter of the earth can be found. Take the twenty-fourth part of the circle of the earth: thus the remaining third part. This is two thousand six hundred eighty-one miles and a half of one mile will be the diameter of the earth. Thus from the circles of the spheres it is supposed to be composed understood. Chapter Second.

Of the greater and lesser circles… [already treated above].

End of the Appendix and of the Theorica of the Planets by Georgius Purbachius. Of the Sun.

It has three orbs all mutually divided and contiguous. The outer according to its convex surface is concentric to the world, according to its concave however eccentric. The innermost according to its concave is concentric, according to its convex eccentric. The third placed in the middle of these according to its convex and concave surface is eccentric to the world. It is called the inner concentric orb whose center is the center of the world. Eccentric however whose center is other than the center of the world. Therefore the two first are eccentric in a certain manner: they are called the orbs carrying the apogee of the Sun. For by the motion of these the apogee of the Sun is varied. The third however is eccentric called the orb carrying the Sun: by its motion the solar body moves itself.

These three orbs hold two centers. For the convex surface of the outer and concave of the inner have the same center with each other. Whence the whole sphere of the Sun just as of the other of any planet is called the concentric wheel of the world. But the concave surface of the outer and the convex of the inner together with both surfaces of the middle have another center which is called. The orbs carrying the apogee of the Sun by their own proportional motions, that the narrower part of the outer be above the broader of the middle being circumscribed according to the change of the motion of the apogee of the sphere and of the sphere. And of which will be said afterward. Moreover the motions of these are of the ecliptic, the yellow sphere. For the apogee of the eccentric carrying the Sun on the surface of the ecliptic continually revolves. But the body of the Sun carried with the motion of its own orb through its own center regularly according to the succession of the signs daily by nine minutes and fifty seconds and through parts of the circumference, and by the center of the solar body in one revolution collected and described moves. Whose motion the poles, the poles of the former orbs are the terminals of the axis of that orb; a line passing through the center of the eccentric and through the poles of that ecliptic equally distant moves. Whence it appears that by the motion of the orbs carrying the apogee which they have by the force of the motion of the eighth sphere the axis of the orb carrying the Sun with the center of the eccentric and with the poles of the same describe circles around the axes of the orbs carrying the apogee, small circles. Since from the center of the solar body at the regular motion is made and the eccentric for a point irregularly at the regular motion is made: therefore while the Sun is over the center of the world at times unequal the unequal angles and unequal arcs of the circumference it describes.

The eccentric circle is called that whose center is other than the center of the world which encircles the center of the world. We imagine as if in the solar eccentric a straight line is drawn from the center of the eccentric to the center of the Sun extended to the zodiac. Let the center of the solar body moved over the center of the eccentric regularly in a revolution stay upon the surface of the ecliptic: a circle is described in it which is always the surface of the ecliptic of the orb of the signs or of the eighth sphere. The solar apogee in the first signification or longitude is the point of the circumference of the eccentric farthest from the center of the world and determined by a straight line going out from the center of the world through the center of the eccentric to the apogee is called. The opposite point of the apogee or the nearer longitude is the point of the circumference of the eccentric nearest to the center of the world diametrically opposite the apogee. The middle longitude of the apogee and the apogee in the circumference either of the apogee opposite is determined by the straight line which comes out from the center of the world which makes right angles with the line drawn in the same eccentric.

The line of the mean motion of the Sun is the line from the center of the world to the zodiac, extended equal distant from the line of mean motion of the Sun to the ecliptic. These two lines twice a year are one and the same when the Sun is in the apogee of the eccentric or in the opposite. Just as one of them revolves regularly upon its own center the other also upon its own. Therefore whenever they are with the apogees and these lines make equal angles the mean motion of the Sun is the arc of the zodiac from Aries beginning. The theorem of the lines of motion: the apogee of the Sun in the second signification is the arc of the zodiac from Aries according to the succession of the signs to the apogee line. The mean motion of the Sun is the arc of the zodiac from the beginning of Aries to the line of the mean motion of the Sun to the signs of the motion. This arc is always similar to the arc of the eccentric between the apogee of the eccentric and the mean motion of the Sun according to the same sign. From that it is clear that after the apogee of the Sun in the second signification subtract the mean motion of the Sun’s motion either from the whole circle the Sun’s argument remains. The line of the true motion of the Sun is the line which from the center of the world through the center of the solar body to the zodiac is extended. Which the Sun in the apogee or opposite when it is exists this is the same with the line of the mean motion. The true motion of the Sun is the arc of the zodiac from the beginning of Aries to the line of the true motion of the Sun. When moreover it is elsewhere the mean and true differ. The equation of the Sun is the arc of the zodiac between the lines of the mean motion and the true according to the succession of the signs: the axis of the apogee the diameter of the apogee of the Sun.

The theorem of the spheres shows that the apogee and the center of the world when they are in one line the equation is nothing; but the apogee passes through the middle that is when the argument is ninety degrees the equation is greatest. The line of mean motion surpasses or precedes the true: then the equation is to be subtracted from the mean motion. But when the argument is greater than six signs on the contrary the mean motion lags behind the true: therefore it must be added to the mean that the true may result. Of the Moon. The Moon has four orbs of which it has three orbs as the Sun placed as to the arrangement: namely two eccentric in a manner which are called the orbs carrying the apogee of the eccentric of the Moon: the third eccentric simply placed in the middle of these and carrying the epicycle is the deferent also called the orb of the Moon carrying the epicycle. Then it has an orb concentric to the world aggregated from the three others surrounding which carries the head of the dragon. Lastly it has a small sphere which is called the epicycle of the depth of the orb of the third; by which epicycle the body of the Moon is carried. Therefore the motions carrying the apogee of the eccentric around its axis move the Moon; nevertheless the epicycle is cut by the surface of the ecliptic in the diameter of the world through the two known declinations of maximum of the motion: and it is to be understood that only with the declination of those sides of the declination described anywhere the near moving with the head: the ultimate is not the head with the axis of the same; hence the center with its inclination in like manner to the principle of the declination being the point is not cut by the guide. The arc carrying carrying the epicycle; in the outer against the rotation of the eighth sphere with the points one easily may hold: because and in the guide the arc of declination is close to thirty degrees. And here the better to be shown that in this is the scene in the restitution of the inclination carried by the axis in the image, the progress of the ninth: when it comes to the equinoctial points, it is to be noted that the superior in the Moon itself there declines; therefore between two likewise removing from the oblique the sphere is carried following this but after the rest the lowest declines. And here is the sample which by a certain conjecture Aquinas the nearer: in that the inclination after being found the place is shown in the same argument; and this happens because as has been shown the sixth now unequal at greater time: soon what is concerning is to be done, as the principles of demonstrations declare that the rest of this theorem may be seen for this in the transition of the guides.

Of the varied motions of the planets.
A planet is said to be direct when the line of its true motion according to the succession of the signs goes forward. Retrograde when the contrary. It is called stationary in two ways. The first station in the first signification is the point of the epicycle in which the planet begins to be retrograde. The second station in the same signification is the point of the epicycle in which the planet begins to be direct. These two stations are on the circle of the epicycle, always in the same place of the deferent and on both sides equally distant from the apogee and the true apogee of the epicycle.

The first station in the second signification is the arc of the epicycle from the true apogee of the epicycle up to the first station in the first signification. The second station in the second signification is the arc of the epicycle from the true apogee up to the second station in the first signification. The arc of retrogradation is the arc of the epicycle from the first station of the first signification up to the point opposite the apogee. These arcs are greater or smaller according to the variation of the argument of the center. Whenever the center of the epicycle shall be nearer to the apogee of the deferent so much the lesser are the stations; when nearer the opposite of the apogee so much the greater, because with a greater epicycle and slower argument the planet is more often retrograde.

So also the arcs of station or of retrogradation vary in their lengths, since in the same day the arcs and the motion of the argument of the planet differ. From these it follows that from the first station subtracting from the whole circle the second station, the arc of retrogradation is had; which, added to the arc of direct motion, makes the whole circle. The epicycle has, as in the others, if stations or retrogradations do not occur through the speed of the motion of the center of the epicycle or through the smallness of the epicycle. By the greater arc of the zodiac it describes each day according to the succession the arc of the zodiac corresponding to the arc of the epicycle which the body of the planet likewise with the same succession in the higher part of the epicycle having latitude if it shall be in the upper middle of the epicycle it is slow; if in the lower, swift: thus it is necessary that a slower body with greater orbit and with a slower argument moves.

The addition of number because the equation is added upon the mean motion diminishes when it subtracts. Increase in light when it recedes from the Sun or when the Sun recedes from it. It diminishes in light when it approaches the Sun or the Sun to it. Eastern morning are those which before the Sun. Western truly set after the Sun. Eastern of the morning rising are those which, having gone out from the rays by their own motion either from the Sun or the Sun from them, begin to appear in the morning before sunrise. Eastern of the evening rising are those which having gone out from the rays by their own motion either from the Sun or the Sun from them begin to appear in the evening after sunset. Western morning setting are those which depart from the Sun’s rays by their own approach to the Sun and begin to be hidden in the morning. Western of the evening setting are those which depart from the rays by their own approach to the Sun and begin to be hidden after sunset. The three superiors do not set by morning setting nor rise by evening rising; but Venus and Mercury sometimes before sometimes after the Moon after a conjunction of the Moon with the Sun sooner or later appear.

One declination or obliquity of the zodiac to the horizon. For if the conjunction be under the ecliptic in the middle of the sign of Sagittarius or of Gemini then to set or to rise in the horizon more degrees are required in the circle of revolution of the Moon than to the Sun in the horizon that of the zodiac to the Sun. Hence in northern climates it can more quickly be seen if the Moon shall be in the other half of the zodiac; again the latitude of the Moon from the ecliptic, because if after conjunction it moves with northern latitude it will be seen sooner; if with southern latitude later. The third is the speed of the true motion of the Moon because if it is swift it appears sooner; if slow later. It happens therefore that when the conjunction occurs both the true and the new appear on the same day; when it is farther, then on the second day after conjunction; sometimes only one on the third day is seen; sometimes also both at opposition it happens: then on the fourth day to appear.

Aspects of the planets.
A trine is when they are separated by a third part; a quadrate when by a fourth; a sextile when by a sixth part of the ecliptic, that is, when their true places differ. A mean conjunction of planets is when their lines of mean motion according to the longitude of the zodiac are conjoined; a true when the lines of the true motions thus come together. But a visible one when the lines drawn from our eye through the centers of their bodies are conjoined. Let the theorem of aspects be said of the true. And let these be taken in sign, degree, minute. From this it is evident that often the true conjunction is because the mean precedes or follows; often future often it is clear if it is visible. Sometimes also the visible precedes because to pursue, the place of a star is the place of the firmament; the line drawn from the center of the world through the place of the star determines. The place of a star seen or apparent is determined by a line drawn from the eye through the body of the star. Parallax of the star is the arc of a great circle passing through the zenith and through the true place of the star between the true place and the apparent. Hence it is clear that the nearer the star is to the center of the world or to the horizon the greater parallax it has. This likewise is greatest in the Moon; in Mars however not very perceptible because the semidiameter of the Earth perceptible and of the Moon’s orbit is little compared to the semidiameter of Mars’ orbit.

Parallax of a star in longitude is the arc of the ecliptic intercepted between two great circles of which one through the poles of the ecliptic passes through the true place of the star; the other likewise through those poles passes through the apparent place of the star. Parallax of a star in latitude is the arc of a great circle passing through the poles of the zodiac through the true place of the star, intercepted between two ecliptic circles equidistant of which one passes through the true place of the star, the other through its apparent. And what is said of these equidistant circles intercepting is similar to the parallax of aspect in longitude; whence the parallax of aspect is like the diagonal line of a quadrilateral whose sides are the parallax in longitude, the parallax in latitude; the parallax of the Sun is the excess of the parallax of the Moon over the parallax of the Sun. If the true conjunction of the luminaries happens between the ascending degree of the ecliptic and the descending its apparent conjunction will be before; as between the descending and the nonagesimal its apparent will be after the true. As between the same nonagesimal and the descending the apparent conjunction occurs; and what is said of the conjunction equally must be said of the opposition of the visible; if by chance it happens in the same degree ninety, then simultaneously the visible conjunction and the true occur and then there is no parallax of aspect. Likewise if it happens in a degree ninety then equally must the visible conjunction be and the true. And there is no parallax of aspect. The nonagesimal degree of the ecliptic is that which is farthest from the horizon, which with the circle of position through the poles of the zodiac ascends. The latitude of the Moon is the arc of a great circle through the poles of the zodiac of the Moon or passing through the ecliptic; of an equidistant circle of the ecliptic which are intercepted by the place of the Moon seen or of its place of traversal.

Digits of eclipse are called the twelfths of the diameter of the body of the Sun or Moon eclipsed. “Minutes of loss” in a lunar eclipse are the minutes of the zodiac which the Moon travels surpassing the Sun from the beginning of the eclipse up to its middle if it is partial or universal without delay; or from the beginning to the beginning of total obscuration if universal with delay; and the delay of half the shadow are the minutes of the zodiac which the Moon by surpassing the Sun from the beginning of the total obscuration up to its middle travels. “Minutes of loss” in a solar eclipse are the minutes which the Moon from the beginning of the eclipse up to the middle in its own course beyond the Sun passes: therefore these minutes divided by the hour in which it passes through it appear. The visible diameter of the Sun in the apogee of the eccentric is 32 minutes of chord; in the perigee 34 minutes; and proportion five to sixty. This is the motion of the Sun in an hour added to its diameter. The Moon in the apogee of the eccentric and epicycle is twenty-nine minutes; but in the apogee of the eccentric opposite the apogee of the epicycle thirty-six minutes and proportion forty-eight to forty-seven: this is the motion of the Moon in an hour added to its diameter. Hence it follows that it can even happen that although an eclipse of the Sun happens it can in some places by nature not appear because of the parallax of aspect of the whole Sun when the distance of its center from the center of the Earth is greatest; the diameter of the shadow in the place of the transit of the Moon is less than the visible diameter of the Moon when the Sun is at apogee and that place at other motion. Theorica of lunar eclipse; Theorica of solar eclipse.

Theorica of declination and latitude.
In the ordinary stars, declination is the distance of it from the equator in the circle passing through the poles of the world through the place of the star; the straight line from the center of the world through the body of the star designates it. Latitude of a star is its distance from the ecliptic computed in the circle through the poles of the ecliptic through the place of the star measured. From these of the Sun it is manifest that the Sun has no latitude, although it has declination, because the surface of the deferent of the Sun always remains on the surface of the ecliptic. The Moon indeed because of the declination of the axis of the apogee moving of the band of the zodiac its deferent’s plane always cuts the plane of the ecliptic through the diameter of the world, and so in opposite declinations the quantitas of its maximum declination always invariable remains on the plane of the epicycle; it never recedes from the plane of the deferent.

Therefore it has only one latitude which touches the declination of the deferent from the ecliptic. This is known through the argument of the latitude of the Moon. The three superiors and also Venus and Mercury have double latitude: one on account of the declination of the deferent from the ecliptic, the other on account of the inclination of the diameter of the true apogee of the epicycle which is called the inclination; the third on account of the reflection of the diameter of the mean longitude with respect to the true apogee which is called the reflexion. The deferent indeed in latitude now ascends toward the north, now descends toward the south by its own diameter moves: whose motion the poles are three degrees removed from the apogee of the mean of the world in ninety degrees of the ecliptic distant: there is the head and the tail. And the motion of this declination of the deferent is by equal motion of the center of the epicycle in its circle such that the declination of the deferent from the ecliptic is nothing when the center of the epicycle stands at the node that is in the head or tail: there it is entirely on the surface of the ecliptic; but from the node the center of the epicycle recedes it begins the deferent to decline so that the middle part through which it proceeds the center of the epicycle in Venus is toward the north when the apogee of the deferent has the declination in Mercury toward the south. And when the apogee of the deferent and the apogee of the epicycle exist in the same part of the zodiac: then the declination of the deferent is maximal; afterwards continuously decreases until the center of the epicycle comes to the other node where again it is nothing; then again as before.

By this therefore the maximal declination of the deferent is obtained nothing the epicycle declines then the greatest is when the center of the epicycle is at the node: nothing. The inclination of the epicycle as the plane of the epicycle now ascends, now descends to the plane of the deferent its motion is made upon the diameter of the epicycle of the mean apogee in the plane of the deferent by the line of the mean motion. The inclination is equal when the diameter of the apogee of the epicycle is in the node of the deferent: because then in that situation the reflection is nothing. The plane of the epicycle is on the plane of the deferent when the center of the epicycle is at the head or tail, there is the head or tail of the epicycle. When the center of the epicycle is in the head of the deferent or opposite the inclination of the epicycle is maximal in Venus seventeen minutes, in Mercury thirty-five minutes of a degree. When from the node the center of the epicycle recedes toward its apogee the diameter of the apogee of the epicycle is inclined little by little to the plane of the deferent so that when the center of the epicycle has receded ninety degrees from the node on either side toward the apogee of the epicycle it is maximum. Then again decreases until the center returns to the node. The reflection of the diameter of the mean longitude is when the diameter of the mean longitude of the epicycle is reflected from the true apogee with respect to the deferent: this reflexion has its motion on the diameter of the epicycle of the mean longitude, whose axis is turned with the center of the deferent by uniform motion.

The plane of the epicycle in latitude because of the maximal reflection of the diameter of the apogee passes outside the deferent; therefore sometimes it passes within; sometimes outside equally. Hence when the center of the epicycle is at the node and the diameter of the apogee of the epicycle coincides with the plane of the deferent there is no reflection. But the center of the epicycle receding from that node toward the apogee or the opposite the reflexion of the diameter begins: the middle of the epicycle on the left side of the deferent: on the right side reflection begins. It increases until the center of the epicycle is at the apogee of the deferent or at the opposite and the apogee of the epicycle at the apogee of the deferent; then the maximal reflection occurs: but then the center of the epicycle is outside and is more distant from the center of the world than in any other configuration; it is not then in the opposite of the apogee of the deferent, nor in the line of the touching of the small circle through the center of the world drawn; because while the center of the epicycle is in the apogee of the deferent, the situation of the apogee of the deferent is from the center of the world so near that in any other situation of the deferent the center of the epicycle will not be nearer the center of the world than in this we have said. From this it is evident that not always is the center of the epicycle at the same time in the greatest remoteness from the center of the world and in the greatest approach. But the highest or nearest in one year because this place touches the deferent in which the center of the epicycle is at the apogee or opposite which stands very near the center of the world the nearest place of the epicycle will be not at the same time as the greatest distance because in the opposite of the apogee of the deferent it cannot stand when near the center of the world. Sixth, from the things said it appears clearly the center of the epicycle of Mercury by its motions described, from the deferent to the mean apogee alike the epicycle multiplies: for the figure or equal at times in a year finds the point of the deferent where it is nearest to the center of the world; in that also is understood from the positions stated that the center of the epicycle of Mercury twice in the year exists in the same distance from the center of the world although in the apogee of the deferent not through the diameter the center of the world is reached and beyond in outer distance: he finds himself in greater distance proportionally than in the situation of apogee. Therefore is equated in the number of degrees the greatest approach and of equal measure the contrary is removed because although perhaps it will be at the apogee of the deferent the center of the epicycle descends than if it were at the apogee of the deferent; thus it will be raised and its maximum is continuous; therefore by a combined method the motions of the deferent and the epicycle and their centers are reduced.

Thus not always the same distance exists the center of the epicycle and the center of the deferent but sometimes long from approach of the center and there a little removed: but of the apogee of the deferent. And so thus the greatest eccentricities of the center of the epicycle toward the opposite apogee increase towards the opposite of the apogee of the deferent they diminish: and according to this twice in a year the eccentricities increase and twice diminish. Therefore the place of the center of the deferent is good to note so that the center of the epicycle may be found if the greatest approach is sought the degrees of Mercury: the apogee of the mean is the nearest, always in which the distance is ninety degrees. The true place.

All are fourfold.



